JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
The spotlight's on Indiana.
Hoosiers cast
a critical primary vote in the
race for the
White House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Tuesday:
the national conversation on
rethinking educational
standards. We sit down with
Education Secretary
John King.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, what do you
do when a
family member runs away from
home to fight
for ISIS? Mothers and brothers
of terrorist
fighters speak out.
CHRISTIANNE BOUDREAU, Mother of
Slain Foreign
Fighter: Not only do they lose
their son or
their daughter to something
horrific, but
they also carry the guilt of
what their child
has done to others. And it's a
horrible, horrible
burden to carry.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's a lot
riding on
the results from Indiana's
presidential primary
tonight, and the tension is
higher than ever.
The top two Republican
candidates unloaded
on each other today, taking the
vitriol to
new levels.
John Yang reports.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
This man is a pathological liar.
JOHN YANG: Ted Cruz in Indiana
this morning
unleashing a blistering attack
on Donald Trump.
The Republican front-runner
cited an unsubstantiated
National Enquirer report that
linked Cruz's
father, Rafael, to the man who
killed President
John F. Kennedy.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
His father with was Lee Harvey
Oswald prior
to Oswald's being, you know,
shot. And nobody
even brings it up. I mean, they
don't even
talk about that.
JOHN YANG: Trump also chided
Cruz over a confrontation
with the New York businessman's
supporters.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, they know
he's lying.
They have been watching him lie.
That's what
he does. That's why we call him
lyin' Ted.
JOHN YANG: Hours later, Cruz
branded Trump
utterly amoral and compared
likened him to
a character in the "Back to the
Future" movies.
SEN. TED CRUZ: A caricature of a
braggadocios,
arrogant buffoon who builds
giant casinos
with giant pictures of him
everywhere he looks.
We are looking, potentially, at
the Biff Tannen
presidency.
JOHN YANG: This very personal
war of words
went white-hot even as Indiana
voters were
going to the polls. And while
Trump was trading
barbs with Cruz, he was taking
fire on another
front, from Democratic
front-runner Hillary
Clinton. She was interviewed on
MSNBC.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He has given no indication that
he understands
the gravity of the
responsibilities that go
with being commander in chief,
and that will
be a big part of my campaign.
JOHN YANG: Clinton spent the day
in West Virginia
and Ohio. But Democratic rival
Bernie Sanders
made a last-ditch push in
Indiana.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
These trade agreements, whether
it's NAFTA
or permanent normal trade
relations with China,
were a disaster for American
workers. I understood
that. I fought them. I was out
on picket lines
with workers in opposition to
NAFTA. Secretary
Clinton, as you know, has
supported every
one of these disastrous trade
agreements.
JOHN YANG: After today, the
primary season
moves into the home stretch,
heading toward
the final big day on June 7 and
the biggest
delegate prize, California.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will have a
report from
on the ground in Indiana after
the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Islamic
State fighters killed a U.S.
Navy SEAL in
Northern Iraq. The ISIS attack
near the city
of Mosul was the biggest in
months by the
militants. They broke through
Kurdish militia
forces before being driven off.
U.S. officials
said the SEAL was there in an
advisory role.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
You had an individual who wasn't
in a combat
mission come under withering
attack from enemy
forces. He was in a combat
situation. He was
prepared to deal with it, but,
unfortunately,
under a complex attack, he was
killed. And
it's tragic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In all, three
Americans have
been killed in combat since the
anti-ISIS
campaign began in 2014.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rebel rocket
fire rained
down on a hospital in Aleppo,
Syria, today,
killing at least four people.
The hospital
was in a government-controlled
part of the
city. A health official said
more than 30
people were wounded in the
bombing, many of
them women and children.
Separately, the U.N. Security
Council demanded
protection for hospitals in war
zones.
The president of Doctors Without
Borders pushed
for the vote.
DR. JOANNE LIU, President,
Doctors Without
Borders: We will not leave
patients behind,
and we will not be silent.
Seeking or providing
health care must not be a death
sentence.
You will be judged not on your
words today,
but on your actions. Your work
has only begun.
Please make this resolution save
lives.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
attempts to restore
a truce all across Syria
continued in Moscow.
A special U.N. envoy said peace
talks can
resume if that happens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Kenya, a small
miracle.
A 6-month-old baby girl has been
pulled alive
from a building that collapsed
four days ago
in Nairobi. Officials say she
was dehydrated,
but otherwise unhurt. At least
23 people died
Friday night when the
seven-story building
buckled after several days of
heavy rain.
More than 90 others are still
missing. Interior
Ministry officials say the
building had been
marked for demolition.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, more
than 45,000 Detroit students
missed class
for a second day, as state
lawmakers worked
to end a teacher sick-out. The
teachers rallied
outside public school
headquarters to protest
a funding shortage. Union
officials say it
could leave some of them unpaid
this summer.
Legislative leaders insisted
today the teachers
will be paid. They're debating a
$720 million
plan for the debt-ridden
schools.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two states chose
different
paths today on allowing
concealed guns on
college campuses. In Tennessee,
a bill permitting
the practice became law, when
Republican Governor
Bill Haslam chose not to sign it
or veto it.
But, in Georgia, Republican
Nathan Deal vetoed
a similar bill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: U.S. car sales
slumped last
month, but trucks and SUVs
soared, thanks
to cheaper gas. Honda and Nissan
gained 13
percent to 14 percent, their
best April ever.
But Wall Street had a down day,
on worries
about growth in Europe and
China. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost
140 points to
close at 17750. The Nasdaq fell
54 points.
And the S&P 500 slipped 18.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the hip-hop
Broadway musical
"Hamilton" isn't done making
history yet.
The groundbreaking show garnered
a record
16 Tony nominations today. If it
wins as many
as 13, that would be a record,
too. The Tony
Awards for live Broadway theater
performances
will be handed out June 12.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
how Indiana's election results
could shape
the rest of the presidential
primary; Education
Secretary John King talks about
the impact
new national standards are
having in the classroom;
inside the government-held areas
of Syria,
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to
Indiana and today's
crucial primary vote.
We're joined by Brandon Smith of
Indiana Public
Broadcasting.
So, Brandon, we talked to you
last week, and
I think a lot of us thought the
Republican
race couldn't get any rougher,
but, apparently,
it is. What's the state of that
race right
now?
BRANDON SMITH, Indiana Public
Broadcasting:
Well, certainly, I don't know if
we can say
anything new from Donald Trump's
side. Some
would call what he said
outlandish, what he's
been -- this whole JFK
assassination connection
between Cruz's father.
But, certainly, Cruz's reaction
is something
we haven't quite seen before,
and what some
think is a hint of frustration,
certainly,
and perhaps even some
desperation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why are people
saying that?
BRANDON SMITH: Well, this is
high noon for
Ted Cruz, I mean, and he's made
it that way.
He's made it very clear that
Indiana is the
time. It's the place to -- if
he's going to
make an impact in this race in
stopping Donald
Trump from the nomination, that
Indiana is
the place to do it.
He set himself up for some
pretty big stakes
here. And yet just about every
poll we have
seen has him trailing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is your
understanding
from your -- and from your
reporting, Brandon
Smith, on what is driving the
Trump vote?
Who is supporting Donald Trump
and why?
BRANDON SMITH: A lot of new
voters.
I have talked to county clerks
around the
state who say they have seen
record numbers
in some cases of new
registrations, brand-new
voters who haven't vote before.
So that's
certainly part of it. It's also
people who
aren't the evangelical vote that
Ted Cruz
brings out, but are Republicans
and concerned
chiefly with economic issues,
how the manufacturing
industry is in this state.
And that's something that Donald
Trump speaks
a lot to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about on the
Cruz side?
What do you see driving his
vote?
BRANDON SMITH: Some of it is,
like we -- like
I just said, the evangelical
vote that he
brings out, and it's certainly
strong in some
parts of this state.
There's also no small part of
that crowd who's
in it to stop Trump, some Kasich
supporters
who say, I'm here to stop Trump,
I'm voting
for Cruz. That's some of it. But
it doesn't
look like it will be enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much is
organization going
to matter, do you think, when
they count the
votes tonight?
BRANDON SMITH: I'm not sure how
much it will
end up mattering, because the
best organization
is probably Ted Cruz. He
certainly spent the
most time here. He's gone all --
he's blanketed
the state. It's been quite the
barnstorming
tour of Indiana.
And yet he is still probably --
it looks like
he's going to lose, or at least
not get a
very big vote here. So, I'm not
sure how much
the organization will end up
mattering.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you now about
the Democrats. If you believe
the polls, that
one is much closer. What does it
look like
to you?
BRANDON SMITH: That's the way
it's looking
here too. And it looks to be an
echo of 2008,
in which Hillary Clinton beat
then candidate
Barack Obama by a pretty narrow
margin.
It looks to be heading in the
same direction
here. Bernie Sanders certainly
drives out
a lot of young people. Turnout
has been high
around the state so far in both
early voting
and what we have seen at the
polls today.
So that will certainly help him,
too, if it's
a lot of young people out there
voting.
But it looks to be a pretty
close margin,
though Hillary is expected by
people here
to win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's motivating
the Hillary
Clinton vote? What do people
like about her
who say they're going to vote
for her?
BRANDON SMITH: Well, it's a
couple things.
One, I mentioned 2008. This is
in many ways
a Clinton state in that respect.
She spent
a lot of time here back then,
and people remember
that. She has a lot of support
from the so-called
party establishment. A lot of
big-time Democratic
leaders in this state threw
their support
behind Hillary Clinton.
And some of it is also those
economic issues,
but it's the idea that Hillary's
ideas, Hillary's
plans are perhaps a little more
achievable
than Bernie Sanders'.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Sanders, just
quickly,
his support, younger voters?
BRANDON SMITH: Younger voters,
people disillusioned,
a little bit of the mirror of
Donald Trump's
support, some people who don't
like the system
and think that Bernie will kind
of upset the
apple cart for good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brandon Smith
with Indiana
Public Broadcasting, we thank
you. Good to
have you with us again.
BRANDON SMITH: Thanks very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can
follow the latest
results from Indiana on our Web
site. Plus,
find a profile of one of
Pennsylvania's delegates
who will cast a critical vote at
the GOP Convention
in Cleveland. It's the first in
our series
profiling delegates. You can
read that on
our home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Education
Secretary John
King has only been officially in
his position
about a month-and-a-half, taking
over for
Arne Duncan, who served for the
first seven
years of President Obama's
administration.
But King has inherited a very
full plate,
including the successor to No
Child Left Behind,
increasing resegregation of
public schools,
and a higher education
admissions process
he likens to a caste system.
I sat down with him earlier
today as part
of our Making the Grade series
on education.
While the majority of the states
are implementing
Common Core, it hasn't been
without resistance.
There are still hundreds of
thousands of parents
out there who are having their
children opt
out of some of these tests.
And my question is, doesn't that
structurally
defeat the system if, at a
certain threshold,
you can't get good data anymore
because people
are opting out?
JOHN KING, U.S. Education
Secretary: So, the
effort to raise standards is
really about
ensuring that all students
graduate ready
for what's next.
As you said, we have 40-plus
states that are
working on higher standards.
There are challenges,
for sure, in raising standards,
changes that
need to be made to instruction,
to classroom
materials, and to assessments.
And states
are making smart adjustments
along the way.
I think we generally have
positive momentum.
We have the highest graduation
rate we have
ever had as a country last year.
But it's
not surprising that there are
going to be
challenges along the way, and
states are going
to need to be responsive to what
they're hearing
from parents and educators, make
adjustments,
while staying focused on raising
standards.
HARI SREENIVASAN: No Child Left
Behind, we
all now in hindsight know that
we didn't reach
100 percent proficiency by 2014.
But one of
the things that that did do for
us is give
us a little bit of visibility
into how specific
schools and specific subgroups
were performing.
So, now, with the Every Student
Succeeds Act,
it seems that you're letting
possibly thousands
of schools who were
underperforming off the
hook by focusing on just the 5
percent that
are really going to get -- be
targeted the
aid.
JOHN KING: The structure of the
Every Student
Succeeds Act is to give states
and local districts
more flexibility, but within
clear civil rights
guardrails.
There is a very clear
requirement for states
and districts to intervene when
schools are
struggling, as you say, in the
bottom 5 percent,
but also schools that have
chronically low
graduation rates, schools that
have significant
achievement gaps, where
subgroups, African-American
students, Latino students,
English learners,
if those subgroups are
underperforming, states
and districts also have an
obligation to intervene.
The president signed the law
because he believes
it builds on the civil rights
legacy of the
law, which was first adopted in
1965 as a
civil rights law. And so those
civil rights
guardrails are key, we think, to
successful
implementation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It actually
takes a significant
amount of power out of this very
office and
gives it back to the states in
several ways.
So, you can't actually impose
any specific
guidelines about Common Core or
about things
that states have to do.
So, I'm trying to figure out,
what's the right
balance between the federal
government's involvement
and state governments'
administration of education?
JOHN KING: Well, we think, on
standards, that
that's a good example of where
we have tried
to strike the right balance.
So, the law requires that states
adopt standards
that will ensure that, when
students graduate
from high school, they're ready
for college
and careers, they're ready to do
credit-bearing
course work in college. That's
good, because
it means every state has to have
high standards.
That said, the specific details
of those standards
are left to states. We think
that's right.
That's what we have always
thought, that states
should be the ones determining
their standards.
On accountability, it's clear
states and districts
have a responsibility to
intervene where schools
are struggling or where there
are achievement
gaps, but the exact nature of
those interventions,
they can design based on local
circumstances.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things that people
are concerned about structurally
is that there
almost seems to be a
resegregation of education
in America right now, that, in
the last three
years, two things have changed
primarily,
that minorities now outnumber
whites in the
nation's public schools, and the
majority
of public school students are
poor, and that
they qualify for free lunches.
How do we change this narrative
about almost
two separate education systems?
JOHN KING: It's a huge problem.
We know that we have tons of
research evidence
over decades showing that
students do better
in diverse schools, and yet 60
years after
Brown vs. Board of Education, we
still have
racially isolated, economically
isolated schools.
What's encouraging -- the
Century Foundation
just did a report on this
recently. What's
encouraging is, you have efforts
all over
the country, locally-led
voluntary efforts,
to create socioeconomically
integrated schools.
And we want to -- we want to
accelerate that
work, so we have made school
diversity a priority
for investing in an innovation
grant program.
The president's proposed an
initiative called
Stronger Together, $120 million
in his 2017
budget that would support local
efforts to
create socioeconomically diverse
schools.
Schools -- you can imagine an
art school that
might draw students from across
different
communities, a dual-language
school where
native English speakers and
English learners
would together have the
opportunity to learn
two languages.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even in terms
of higher
ed, you have said before that
there's almost
a caste system of colleges and
universities
in the admissions process. So,
how do we change
that?
JOHN KING: I think of a place
like Franklin
& Marshall that's committed to
enrolling low-income
students, has raised their
academic standards
at the same time as they have
enrolled more
low-income students, and they're
providing
the supports necessary to ensure
that those
students graduate.
And so I think there's a bully
pulpit role
for the administration to play.
But we have
also got to make sure the
resources are there.
And that's why the Pell Grant
program is so
important. It's why the
president has added
$1,000 to the average Pell Grant
since the
administration began.
It's why we think it's important
to let students
access Pell Grants in the
summer, because
that will help low-income
students stay on
track to graduation. So, there's
both a -- there's
both a moral responsibility that
higher ed
institutions have, and a
responsibility that
government has to provide the
resources to
support all of our citizens in
making it through
higher education.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
unlike a lot of
education secretaries or Cabinet
members,
you have got a kind of a
personal connection
to education. You lost your
parents when you
were a very young age, and you
have said before
that it's really teachers that
saved your
life.
Explain that.
JOHN KING: School really did
save my life.
My mom passed away when I was 8
in October
of my fourth-grade year. I lived
with my dad,
who was suffering with
undiagnosed Alzheimer's
disease.
And so home was this very scary
and unpredictable
place. My dad passed away when I
was 12. And
during that period, my life
could have gone
in a lot of directions. You
know, teachers
could have looked at me and
said, here's an
African-American Latino male
student, family
in crisis, going to a New York
City public
school in Brooklyn. What chance
does he have?
But they didn't. They chose to
invest in me
and made school this place that
was engaging
and compelling and interesting,
where we read
The New York Times every day, we
did productions
of "Midsummer Night's Dream" and
"Alice in
Wonderland." We went to the
ballet and the
museum.
School was engaging and a place
where I could
be a kid when I couldn't be a
kid outside
of school.
So, I'm very clear: I'm alive
today, doing
this work today, became a
teacher and a principal
because the teachers I had saved
my life.
And, you know, I bring to work
every day the
goal of trying to do for other
kids what my
teachers did for me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Secretary
King, thanks for
joining us.
JOHN KING: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
parents of ISIS
fighters grapple with the
warning signs they
missed; a Cinderella story for a
soccer team
and a city; plus, why becoming a
grandma isn't
what it used to be.
But, first, we return to the war
in Syria.
Most of the country's urban
centers have been
hammered by bombs, rockets, and
bullets. But
the heart of the capital,
Damascus, has been
left relatively unscathed.
Orthodox Christians
were even able to hold a public
Palm Sunday
celebration last week as the war
continues
on the city's outskirts.
The New York Times' Declan Walsh
recently
returned from Damascus and
Syria's largest
city, Aleppo, the scene of heavy
fighting
in recent weeks.
He joins me now from Cairo,
Egypt.
Declan Walsh, welcome to the
program.
this moment in the civil war.
What is it like?
DECLAN WALSH, The New York
Times: Well, it's
a country that is under tight
control from
Bashar al-Assad in those parts
of Syria that
he still controls.
And there are military
checkposts everywhere.
There is the image of the
president, Bashar
al-Assad, everywhere you turn,
on every major
public junction. And, you know,
it's a very
strange place in many ways, a
place of great
contrasts. You have -- in
Damascus, just on
outskirts of the city, there are
many neighborhoods
that are controlled by the
rebels.
There is sporadic fighting that
goes on all
the time there. Yet, in the city
center itself,
there is some form, a semblance
of normal
life that's taking place. People
are going
about their business. There's
traffic. At
the weekends, people celebrate.
I saw many
weddings take place.
So people seem to have
determined, as much
as they can, that they need on
get on with
their normal lives, even while
pretty intense
fighting in some cases is taking
place in
great proximity to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How are they
managing to hold
up?
DECLAN WALSH: You know, there is
an international
aid presence on the ground that
is helping
people out somewhat.
The machinery of the state is
still functioning
to some degree. But people are
extremely strained.
In cities like Aleppo and Homs,
which I visited,
you have many people who are
living rough.
They're living in shelters.
They're living
in abandoned buildings. And
they're living
among the among the rubble of
buildings that
have been destroyed in
airstrikes.
So, already, there's a housing
problem. And
there's -- people are also very
vulnerable
when it comes to things like
food, electricity,
water. But, again, it does
depend where you
are in the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And who are
people holding
responsible for their plight,
for where they
are right now?
DECLAN WALSH: Well, when you
speak to Syrians,
people are reticent to talk
about politics
in -- particularly in
government-held areas.
Journalists who visit, like me,
travel around
the country in the company of an
official
from the Ministry of
Information. So, it's
quite difficult to get people to
open up about,
for instance, their attitude
toward President
Bashar al-Assad or indeed to
talk about the
rebels in other areas.
But what people do talk about
is, you know,
how -- they recognize how bad
their own situation
is. They can talk about that
with great, great
freedom. And they feel extremely
frustrated.
And they see -- there's a great
sense of helplessness
among Syrians at this stage,
after five years
of conflict, about the war.
They see it as something that's
much bigger
even than their own country. You
know, this
is a conflict that has so many
foreign forces
involved with it now. People
will talk to
you about America and Russia,
Iran, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey. These are all
the countries
that are supporting different
sides in this
conflict.
And they -- when you speak to
people, there's
an overwhelming sense of
helplessness, that,
you know, there is no easy
solution to this
war in sight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What was so
fascinating, Declan
Walsh, about your reporting is
that, I mean,
ordinary people -- you talked
with a shopkeeper.
You talked with so many others
who just -- they're
still human beings. They still
have, you know,
normal human feelings.
And you were even able to see a
sense of humor
that some of them have, still.
DECLAN WALSH: Oh, absolutely,
yes.
I mean, you know, I suppose
that's one of
the best defense mechanisms for
all of us
in situations of adversity. And
if you have
the strength to try and turn
something to
a joke, even to a dark joke,
it's one way
of getting through the day.
And for those people, Syrians,
who are not
directly caught up in the
fighting on a day-to-day
basis, they're still living in
situations
of adversity. And they're
turning to all sorts
of coping mechanisms to try and
get through
that. Humor is one thing.
You know, when I was in Aleppo,
one of the
most striking things was that,
in the city
center, there was intermittent
shelling. Bombs
were landing here and there. You
would be
driving around in the streets,
and you would
hear an explosion 500 meters
away. There would
be another explosion an hour
later and maybe
a kilometer away.
It made a tremendous racket. And
for a newcomer
like me, you would be absolutely
alarmed,
wondering, you know, what's
going on or where
is this coming from? But the
people that you're
speaking to locally wouldn't
even flinch.
They just went on like it wasn't
happening.
And when you asked them why,
they said, look,
you know, we have been living
with this situation
so long, this is the way we deal
with it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, some
remarkable reporting
from inside Syria.
Declan Walsh of The New York
Times, we thank
you.
DECLAN WALSH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: While we're
reporting on that
war-torn country, for months, we
have reported
on Western-born young people who
travel to
Syria to join the Islamic State.
Parents and relatives of some of
the young
European men who'd joined ISIS
and other extremist
groups met late last week at a
conference
in Paris. Among the group were
also family
members of victims of the
terrorist attacks
last fall in Paris. They
gathered to grieve,
to condemn terrorism and the
extremism that
drives it, and look for ways to
prevent other
young people from following the
fates of their
loved ones.
From Paris, special
correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is the
Bataclan club,
where Islamist gunmen
slaughtered 89 concert-goers
last November the 13th.
It was, briefly, a place of
pilgrimage for
a group of people inextricably
linked to the
massacre through the ideology
embraced by
their relatives, even though
they didn't participate
in the attack.
Karolina Dam, mother of
18-year-old Lukas,
a boy with learning
difficulties, converted
and radicalized in Denmark and
believed killed
in an airstrike on the Syrian
Turkish border.
Janne Mortensen (ph), also from
Denmark, whose
convert foster son, Kenneth, was
killed in
Syria three years ago.
Briton Michael Evans, whose
brother Thomas
converted and joined Al-Shabaab
in Africa.
This footage shows the jihadist
with the nom
de guerre Abdul Hakim just
before he was killed
in a battle with Kenyan troops.
MICHAEL EVANS, Brother: It's
just such a tragic
waste of life. You know, people
out just enjoying
their night were cut down for
nothing. It's
so sad to be here. I don't
understand how
someone who is my own flesh and
blood could
be -- could think like this. I
just don't
understand.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Canadian
Christianne Boudreau
wants deradicalization programs
to make the
most of the experiences of
families like these,
by using them as educators,
helpers, and guides.
She's campaigning in memory of
her convert
son Damian killed in fighting
near Aleppo
in Syria.
CHRISTIANNE BOUDREAU, Mother of
Slain Foreign
Fighter: It could easily have
been my son
that had been walking into here.
It could
have been easily me having to
deal with what
he had done. It's one thing when
he's over
in Syria and we don't see it.
But, here, we're faced with it.
And the parents
that lose a loved one in this
way, in a violent
way, not only do they lose their
son or their
daughter to something horrific,
but they also
carry the guilt of what their
child has done
to others. And it's a horrible,
horrible burden
to carry.
GEORGE SALINES, Father of
Victim: She was
28 years old. She had the
greatest smile in
the world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: George Salines
is talking
about his daughter Lola, one of
those murdered
at the Bataclan. Like others at
the conference,
he wanted it to be a turning
point in the
battle against extremism.
GEORGE SALINES: I very much
wanted to tell
my fellow citizens that, even
though I was
a victim, I had no hate. I just
wanted to
prevent those events from
happening again.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Not all of the
relatives
participating in the conference
wanted to
be identified.
But the sense of solidarity
could be instrumental
in helping more parents to go
public. Michael
Evans made it clear that Islam
wasn't under
attack.
MICHAEL EVANS: No, it hasn't
altered my view
of Islam at all, because my
brother wasn't
practicing Islam. He was
practicing a sick
ideology that just hides behind
Islam.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According to
the Pentagon,
the number of foreign fighters
entering in
Iraq and Syria has gone down by
90 percent
from 2,000 to just 200 a month.
But this conference in Paris has
been told
that interest in joining the
Islamic State
remains enormous. The latest
research shows
that Google has registered
50,000 inquirees
a month for people wishing to
either joined
the so-called Islamic State or
to travel to
Syria.
But the good thing is that all
of these people
leave an electronic trace, which
means that
the West has a chance to counter
the allure
and the propaganda of the
extremists and to
win the battle for hearts and
minds.
This short film dramatizing the
regret of
a wounded Islamist fighter is an
attempt to
match the high production values
of Islamic
State videos, and to win the war
of ideas.
Adam Deen now works for the
counterradicalization
Quilliam Foundation, which
produced the film,
but he once belonged to one of
Britain's most
militant Islamist groups. His
own intellectual
curiosity saved him, but he
worries that not
enough is being done to convince
vulnerable
young Muslims to abandon the
path of extremism.
ADAM DEEN, Quilliam Foundation:
At the end
of the day a very small minority
of individuals
will take up arms, will travel
to ISIS. If
we have a community that is --
has become
-- has developed a religiosity,
and identifies
themselves with the Islamic
faith, the problem
is that the default position for
some -- for
a young Muslim is Islamism and
this type of
puritanical Islam.
And the danger is that, if they
don't have
counternarratives, that they
will be susceptible.
So, a large portion of Muslims,
young Muslims
that are discovering Islam,
let's say, are
susceptible to this type of --
this interpretation,
this pernicious reading.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Norwegian Bjorn
Ihler is
committed to opposing extremism
in all its
forms. He returned to the island
of Utoya,
where the right wing fanatic
Anders Breivik
gunned down 69 young people at a
political
summer camp. Breivik shot at
Ihler, but missed.
Ihler believes similar methods
can neutralize
both the ultra-right and
Islamists.
BJORN IHLER, Utoya Survivor: All
forms of
extremism are very similar in
many ways. Extremism
thrives on the same kind of
factors regardless
of what ideology is titled. And
at the end
of the day, their ideology very
quickly becomes
just an excuse essentially for
being violent.
The issues we need to address
are not necessarily
the theological issues, but
rather the ideological
issue of violence and how
violence is being
used for political means.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Ihler shares
the view of
some experts that bombing the
so-called Islamic
State will lead to more
radicalization. But
former British government
Minister Pauline
Neville-Jones disagrees.
DAME PAULINE NEVILLE-JONES,
Former British
Government Minister: If you use
force, of
course there will be those who
think that
this is a good reason for
joining the jihad.
But one of the things that's
very important
things about Da'esh is actually
to destroy
its claim to constitute a state,
to be a caliphate,
because it's a major part of
their appeal:
We won some territory. We are a
real state
force.
We have actually to destroy
that, because
it's a very -- it's very
insidious. It's very
powerful.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The battle
against ISIS may
be primarily military, but
Karolina Dam believes
that mothers like her can play a
vital role.
KAROLINA DAM, Mother: For me
here, I miss
him like crazy. I really do. I
just wish he
was here. I would have wanted to
talk more
with him about his religion and
what he wants
to do, and how I can be a part,
a better part
in his life, because I -- we
were very close,
me and my boy, but obviously not
close enough.
Otherwise, he would have told me
about this
double life.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Paris may be
peaceful once
again, but there remain fears
that, somewhere
soon in Europe, there will be
another Bataclan.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Paris.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now an
underdog story for
the ages.
The English soccer team
Leicester City came
into this season as overwhelming
long shots,
but now, after defying all the
odds, exit
as their country's overall
football champions.
The anticipation built, and then
players from
Leicester City erupted in
cheers, celebrating
the team's first league title
ever after 132
years.
The Foxes were a 5,000-to-1
shot, but they
won when second-place Tottenham
played to
a tie in its game on Monday.
With that, the
party spilled over into the
streets of Leicester.
MAN: I have been waiting for
this for 40 years
of supporting Leicester City.
It's unbelievable.
And we have done it.
MAN: I mean, the whole world
knows who we
are now. That's important. Maybe
the Americans
can learn to pronounce Leicester
properly
as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's been an
improbable
run for a team that had barely
avoided demotion
from the English Premier League,
the country's
top circuit. Winning the title
was an even
longer shot than the U.S. hockey
team's miracle
win over the Soviet Union in the
1980 Olympics.
Much of the team's success has
been attributed
to its journeyman manager
Claudio Ranieri.
But he said today the credit
belongs to his
players.
QUESTION: How have you done it,
Claudio? What
has been the secret to
Leicester's success
this season?
CLAUDIO RANIERI, Manager,
Leicester City:
I don't know. I don't know the
secret. I think
the players, their heart, their
soul, how
they played.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Leicester has
two games
left to play, but those are now
a formality.
The title also guarantees the
team a spot
in next year's All-European
Champions League
Tournament.
For more on this unlikely season
and the people
who made it happen, we are
joined from London
by Andi Thomas, who covers
soccer for SB Nation,
an all-sports Web site.
So, help us understand how big a
moment this
is for this city, this town.
ANDI THOMAS, SB Nation: It's an
absolutely
massive moment for Leicester the
town and
for Leicester the football club.
It is something that absolutely
nobody involved
with the club or outside the
club would have
expected when the season kicked
off. They'd
have been hoping for, at best, a
solid mid-table
finish to avoid a relegation
struggle, like
last season.
So, yes, this will have been as
surprising
as it will have been kind of
moving.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And did the
momentum build
up throughout the rest of the
U.K. as this
potential grew closer?
ANDI THOMAS: I think so. I think
there's a
lot to like about Leicester as a
-- from a
neutral perspective.
There's the unlikeliness of the
story. There's
the fact that Claudio Ranieri is
a very popular
personality and manager in
general. And some
of the players, not all of them,
but some
of the players are quite, quite
easy to warm
to in some ways.
So, yes, I think there's been a
lot of -- a
lot of outside interest, plus
just the novelty
of seeing someone outside the
normal clubs
in with a shot of winning the
title is something
to celebrate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How crucial
was the manager
in all this? This is a person
who has been
at big league -- or big clubs
before.
ANDI THOMAS: Yes.
And he seems to have been
exceptionally important
for the club. He came in -- he
was very much
a surprise appointment. There
was a lot of
skepticism about whether he --
whether he
was the right person to struggle
against relegation,
because that's what they're
expecting to do.
And, instead, yes, he seems to
have -- because
he inherited a squad that had
just survived
relegation last season, and he
seemed to have
carried on momentum from that
improbable escape
and just made everyone -- united
them as a
team and as a unit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this isn't
a club that
has big superstars that are paid
lavish sums
of money. This is a pretty
average group of
guys.
ANDI THOMAS: Yes.
I mean, by the standards of
anyone outside
football, they're extremely
well-paid professionals,
but by the standards of the
league they're
competing in, they are very much
from the
kind of the bottom rung in terms
of the wages.
The Premier League has never
really been won
by anybody outside kind of the
top-wage-paying
clubs. So, that -- again, that's
just another
factor that makes is a surprise
victory.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, you know,
your oddsmakers
are not wrong that often. When
somebody decides
to place 5,000-to-1 odds against
the team
doing this, what happened? How
did they get
the math so wrong?
ANDI THOMAS: Well, I mean, the
5,000-to-1
odds, that's longer odds than
the Loch Ness
Monster existing. That's longer
odds than
Elvis being found alive.
(LAUGHTER)
ANDI THOMAS: It was very much a
novelty bet,
kind of, if you want to throw 10
pounds away
in a symbolic way, that's how
you do it.
And the fact that -- the fact
that it became
a live bet and a possibility is
unprecedented.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there a
class dimension
to this? I mean, are these -- is
this a working-class
town, I mean, from the folks we
heard from,
vs. some of the elite clubs and
the fan base
that they draw?
ANDI THOMAS: Certainly, I think
it's fair
to say that, in the big clubs in
the Premier
League, they market themselves
very aggressively
as global clubs.
Manchester United has sponsors
from all around
the world. Manchester City have
tie-ins New
York and Melbourne, where, in
Leicester, it
very much feels like a triumph
of the club
and the town, in a slightly
old-fashioned
way, kind of the way English
football used
to be, before it became
stretched at the top
by the money of the Premier
League.
So, yes, there definitely is the
element that
this quite -- it's quite
refreshing, refreshingly
old-fashioned aspect to it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, any
of these players
going to go on and transfer to
other clubs
now that their stock has
improved?
ANDI THOMAS: You would expect
big clubs to
be chasing them, certainly.
I think Riyad Mahrez and N'Golo
Kante will
both -- there will be big bids
for them over
the summer. Whether they go or
not, I don't
know. Leicester, the chance to
go into the
Champions League, this club is
-- the players
are clearly quite keen on one
another and
work very well as a team.
So, whether they will --
hopefully, they will
-- you know, they will give it
at least one
shot in the Champions League
before they accept
the big offers and move on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Andi Thomas from
SB Nation, thanks so much for
joining us.
ANDI THOMAS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the latest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
It's a very personal look at the
changing
role of grandparents and comes
from longtime
"60 Minutes" correspondent
Lesley Stahl, who
has full-heartedly embraced the
job in her
new book, "Becoming Grandma: The
Joys and
Science of the New
Grandparenting."
I talked with her recently.
Welcome, Lesley Stahl.
LESLEY STAHL, Author, "Becoming
Grandma: The
Joys and Science of the New
Grandparenting":
Thank you, Judy Woodruff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we have known
each other
going back to being White House
reporters
under...
LESLEY STAHL: The beginning of
time, Judy.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The beginning of
time, President
Carter, President Reagan.
You are showing a side of
yourself that people
don't see on "60 Minutes" here.
LESLEY STAHL: Well, that's true.
I don't go
around saying, I'm a
grandmother, although
I feel it. I feel it. I want to
tell everybody.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I will be honest
right up front,
I have serious grandmother envy.
I'm dying
to have grandchildren. Is it
really as great
as you make it out to be?
LESLEY STAHL: It's twice as
great as I make
it out to be.
It's -- it's an extraordinary
new chapter
that opens up suddenly, and no
matter how
many people tell you it's the
best thing that
could ever happen to you, it's
-- you don't
-- you don't understand what
they mean until
it happens to you, because it's
so full, body-full.
It just takes you over in such
an elation
way, elated way, that you just
can't believe
this new kind of emotion that
you have never
felt before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's
something that you
decided to write about. I mean,
you could
write about your career, about
journalism,
but it's this.
LESLEY STAHL: This felt right.
And the reason I decided to do
it is because
I didn't understand that
emotion. What is
that? Do all grandmothers have
it? Turns out
they do. And what is it and how
do you explain
it? Where does it come from?
And once I started looking at
that, then all
these different avenues opened
up to me. There's
a whole chapter on
step-grandmothers. And
I discovered that there are
granny nannies.
By that, I mean women taking
care of their
grandchildren on Tuesdays and
Thursdays, Saturdays,
helping their kids out. I just
-- the whole
world opened up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much of the
premise of this,
Lesley, is that this is a new
era of grandparenting.
Our -- grandmothers today are
not what our
grandparents were. And you write
about, you
know, a lot of us have had
careers. You write
about our hair color is
different.
(LAUGHTER)
LESLEY STAHL: We don't play
canasta.
(LAUGHTER)
LESLEY STAHL: We go to work.
You know, baby boomers are kind
of the separate
species of human being. And one
of the things
about baby boomers is that we
want to be young.
Let's face it. And we're young
grandparents,
because we're baby boomers. And,
of course,
we determine everything as we go
through our
history. We're such a big bulge.
We're young. We're energetic.
We're spending
infinitely more money on our
grandchildren
than grandparents of old. I saw
a statistic
the other day. It's not even in
the book.
Grandparents today spend seven
times more
on their grandchildren than they
did just
10 years ago. So...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Part of your
title is "The
Joys and Science of the New
Grandparenting."
LESLEY STAHL: Oh, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that wishful
thinking, or
is that real?
LESLEY STAHL: No, no.
What was that feeling I had?
Well, I was stunned
to discover and delighted that
there are biological
changes that go along when
you're a mother,
but grandmothers have something
similar. And
it's real. What you're feeling
is a change
in your body. You're being
rewired to connect
to this baby.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's not just
because they're
cute and cuddly?
LESLEY STAHL: Well, it's also
because they're
cute and cuddly, but they're
yours. There's
a real binding that goes on
there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were just
telling me that
the cover picture, it looks like
you're sitting
there and you're reading to your
granddaughters.
LESLEY STAHL: Uh-huh. Looks that
way, right?
(LAUGHTER)
LESLEY STAHL: So, they wouldn't
cooperate.
They wouldn't both sit quietly
together at
the same time. So, we put an
iPhone -- we
taped it to the middle of the
book, and they're
watching "Frozen."
(LAUGHTER)
LESLEY STAHL: It's the only --
and I think
that's the only picture we got
where they
were both cooperating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You do focus so
much in the
book, Lesley, on the positives
of grandparenting.
And you have had a very positive
experience.
LESLEY STAHL: I have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we all know
there are grandparents
out there who, for whatever
reason, aren't
being allowed to see their
grandchildren or
who are forced to completely
raise their grandchildren
under difficult circumstances.
It's a mixed picture, isn't it?
LESLEY STAHL: Well, I write
about that and
discovered it, actually.
I have been asked, what's the
thing that most
surprised me? And that
grandparents are denied
access to their own
grandchildren, which is
fairly prevalent, really
surprised me and
shocked me. just it's -- I get
-- I actually
get pained even telling you
about this, because
the grandmothers who admitted it
to me -- and
a lot of them are ashamed about
this -- told
me with tears streaming down
their faces.
It's a horrible thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This book,
Lesley, is -- it's
a very personal story. I mean,
it is very
much about your own family, your
grandchildren,
your relationship with your
mother, what kind
of a grandmother she was.
You also write about your
husband, Aaron Latham,
and you openly say is dealing
with Parkinson's.
So, there's a lot you lay bare
here, isn't
there?
LESLEY STAHL: Well, one of the
things that
-- one of the reasons I wrote
about my own
relationship with my mother,
which was a little
difficult, unlike mine with my
daughter, which
is wonderful -- but my mother
and I clashed
a lot.
But she was a completely
besotted grandmother.
I would look at her and say, who
is that?
And I heard that over and over
from women
my age. "My mother is so
different with my
children." And that's part of
being a grandmother.
You go from being who you are to
being a mush
ball, like that.
And people say, who is he? We
don't know ourselves.
We get so mushy. And this is
part of the reason
I wanted to write it. We -- they
just soften
us completely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can be -- I
guess part
of the message is you can be a
different kind
of grandmother from the kind of
mother you
were?
LESLEY STAHL: Totally different.
And it's
out of your control, even if you
didn't want
to be.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was struck at
the end, you
urge grandparents to jump in if
they're not
already involved in the lives of
their grandchildren,
and urge parents, likewise, to
let their own
parents be involved.
LESLEY STAHL: Well, children
today, young
parents need our help, because
they're not
making much money. They're both
working. They're
suffering economically.
So, they need our help. Those
babies need
their grandparents. We are very
important
to their development. And we
need them, because
they make us healthier. And so
it's a win-win-win.
Why not?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there are
some great
stories here, Lesley Stahl, "The
Joys and
the Science of the New
Grandparenting."
Thank you very much.
LESLEY STAHL: Thank you, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, the
latest in our
occasional series on poets and
what inspires
them.
Tonight, Ocean Vuong, recently
chosen for
the prestigious Whiting Award.
His new book,
"Night Sky With Exit Wounds,"
explores the
legacy of the Vietnam War and
the power of
oral history.
OCEAN VUONG, Author, "Night Sky
With Exit
Wounds": Sometimes, people say,
well, how
does it feel to be the first
poet? And I say,
I'm not the first poet. I come
from a long
line of poets. They were not
documented.
And it's interesting how poems
are carried
from one culture to another. In
Vietnam, there's
much dependency on the body. One
needs to
have the body -- in a way, the
body is a book,
that one needs the body to
remember the poem,
sing the poems and pass them
along.
My grandmother, she was a rice
farmer. In
a sense, all Vietnamese farmers
were poets,
because while they were working,
they sang,
and the songs helped the rhythm
of the harvesting
and the seeding of the fields.
But, also, the daily news of
life, and ultimately,
when the war came, where the
bombs were falling,
information started to come into
the rhyming
couplets in the poems and the
songs. And this
is how information was passed.
In the poem "Aubade with Burning
City," I
took Irving Berlin's "White
Christmas," the
lyrics, and wove it through a
scene about
the collapse of Saigon.
When my grandmother would tell
me about the
collapse of Saigon, she would
say, "Saigon,
this sounds very strange, but I
remember it
fell during the snow song." And
as a child
listening to that, it was so
surreal to me.
That was the song that was used
as a coded
message for American personnel
to evacuate.
So, you can imagine the city
falling apart
during this beautiful,
celebratory song.
"I'm dreaming of a white
Christmas. Outside,
a soldier spits out his
cigarette as footsteps
fill the square like stones
fallen from the
sky. May all your Christmases be
white as
the traffic guard unstraps his
holster, his
fingers running the hem of her
white dress.
A single candle. Their shadows,
two wicks.
A military truck speeds through
the intersection,
children shrieking inside.
"A bicycle hurled through a
store window.
When the dust rises, a black dog
lies panting
in the road, its hind legs
crushed into the
shine of a white Christmas."
When my grandmother passed away
in 2008, and
I wanted to preserve that memory
landscape
on paper, I was faced with where
to break
her lines. And, of course, the
oral tradition
doesn't offer a page. In a way,
I was collaborating
with this -- with my grandmother
beyond her
life.
When we immigrated to America,
all she had
were these songs and poems. My
mother was
also illiterate. She -- her
father is an American
veteran. When we arrived in
America, she went
right into the nail salon to
work, manual
labor. And she made it her goal
to teach me
how to write.
And the poem "The Gift" is very
interesting
because she only knew A, B, C,
three letters.
But she would have me write
those letters
anyway.
"A, B, C, A, B, C, A -- the
pencil snaps,
the B bursting its belly as dark
dust blows
through a blue-lined sky. Don't
move, she
says, as she picks a wing bone
of graphite
from the yellow carcass, slides
it back between
my fingers."
We look at this wall, the
interesting and
tense relationship I have with
the war is
that, without it, I wouldn't be
here. And
if I were to turn around and
walk down this
memorial and find my
grandfather's name, I
wouldn't be alive if his name
was there.
That is -- the facts and the
truths of what
it means to be an American, is
to be involved
in this, and that perhaps --
it's seemingly
so strange that a war in Vietnam
and an American
soldier would bring cause to a
poet like me,
a Vietnamese-American poet.
"When they ask you where you're
from, tell
them your name was fleshed from
the toothless
mouth of a war woman, that you
were not born,
but crawled headfirst into the
hunger of dogs.
My son, tell them the body is a
blade that
sharpens by cutting."
All of these people coming
together out of
violence, trying to do their
best to make
meaning out of their existence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can read
more of Ocean
Vuong's work, along with all of
our poetry
coverage, on our Web site.
That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour/poetry.
Tune in tonight on PBS.
"Frontline" has documentaries
from inside two of the world's
most war-torn
areas. "Yemen Under Siege"
focuses on the
human toll in the chaos of war
in that country,
while "Benghazi in Crisis"
documents the battle
between government forces and
ISIS militants
in Libya's second largest city.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And later on
"Point Taken":
Want to know what your boss
makes? Should
salaries be transparent? Carlos
Watson sits
down with the CEO who set his
company's minimum
wage at $70,000 a year. That's
"Point Taken"
at 11:00 on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online: What
gets lost when
a company outsources its new
employee selection
process? In this week's Ask the
Headhunter
column, read how employers, and
those they
are hiring, suffer when
companies don't take
hiring into their own hands.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.